..
   # *******************************************************************************
   # Copyright (c) 2026 Contributors to the Eclipse Foundation
   #
   # See the NOTICE file(s) distributed with this work for additional
   # information regarding copyright ownership.
   #
   # This program and the accompanying materials are made available under the
   # terms of the Apache License Version 2.0 which is available at
   # https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
   #
   # SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
   # *******************************************************************************

How to Integrate a New Module into the Reference Integration
=============================================================

This guide explains how to add a new S-CORE module to the
`reference_integration <https://github.com/eclipse-score/reference_integration>`_ repository,
using `scrample <https://github.com/eclipse-score/scrample/tree/v0.1.2-simple-app>`_ as a concrete example.
Scrample is a minimal "Hello World" logging application with both a C++ and a Rust implementation,
demonstrating ``mw::log`` integration across both languages.

Background: Why ``known_good.json``?
-------------------------------------

Each S-CORE module lives in its own Git repository and evolves independently.
The reference integration continuously validates that a specific combination of
module versions builds and tests successfully together -- the so-called
*known-good* state.

Keeping this state in a dedicated JSON file instead of directly in Bazel's
``MODULE.bazel`` serves several purposes:

* **Single source of truth.** All version pins, repository URLs, and
  integration metadata (test exclusions, language info, Bazel patches) are
  in one place and machine-readable. Tooling such as CI pipelines, workspace
  generators, and the Bazel module generator all consume the same data.

* **Separation of concerns.** ``known_good.json`` is the *what* (which commit
  of which module), while the generated ``.MODULE.bazel`` file is the *how*
  (the Bazel-specific syntax). Keeping them separate avoids manual errors
  in Bazel syntax and keeps the intent readable without Bazel knowledge.

* **Tooling support.** Because the version data is structured JSON, it can be
  consumed by additional scripts:

  * ``scripts/known_good/override_known_good_repo.py`` -- pins individual
    modules to a different commit (e.g. for testing a PR) without touching
    the canonical file.
  * ``scripts/known_good/known_good_to_workspace_metadata.py`` -- generates
    the workspace manager file (``.gita-workspace.csv``) used to clone all
    module repositories locally.
  * ``scripts/known_good/update_module_from_known_good.py`` -- regenerates
    the Bazel ``MODULE.bazel`` files.

* **Reproducibility.** Every entry is pinned to a full SHA-1 commit hash,
  making the integrated state fully reproducible regardless of branch
  tip movements.

Overview
--------

There are two files that together define which modules are integrated:

* **``known_good.json``** -- the single source of truth for all module versions
  (Git hashes, repository URLs, and metadata such as test configuration).
  This file is edited manually.

* **``bazel_common/score_modules_<category>.MODULE.bazel``** -- generated from
  ``known_good.json`` by a script. **Do not edit this file manually.**

The general workflow is:

1. Add the new module entry to ``known_good.json``.
2. Run the generation script to update the ``.MODULE.bazel`` file.
3. Optionally add a standalone showcase so the module appears in the S-CORE CLI.

Step 1 -- Add the module to ``known_good.json``
------------------------------------------------

Open ``known_good.json`` and add your module under the appropriate category.
There are currently two categories:

* ``target_sw`` -- modules that are part of the target software stack
  (deployed on the target platform, e.g. C++ / Rust runtime components).
* ``tooling`` -- build and development tooling modules.

Scrample is a ``target_sw`` module, so its entry goes under that key.
The ``hash`` is the full SHA-1 commit of the version to integrate -- in this case
the head commit of `PR #31 <https://github.com/eclipse-score/scrample/pull/31>`_:

.. code-block:: json

   "score_scrample": {
       "repo": "https://github.com/eclipse-score/scrample.git",
       "hash": "32abf22969081a7c4a97733cf6d1b88b9e0c9d55",
       "metadata": {
           "code_root_path": "//src_rust/...",
           "langs": ["cpp", "rust"]
       }
   }

.. note::

   ``code_root_path`` points to the Bazel target pattern used for test
   discovery. For scrample the Rust sources live under ``src_rust/``, so
   that is specified explicitly instead of the default ``//score/...``.

Metadata fields explained
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 15 60

   * - Field
     - Required
     - Description
   * - ``repo``
     - yes
     - HTTPS URL to the Git repository (ending in ``.git``).
   * - ``hash``
     - yes
     - Full SHA-1 commit hash of the version to integrate.
   * - ``bazel_patches``
     - no
     - List of Bazel label paths to ``.patch`` files that are applied to the
       module source before building (``patch_strip = 1``).
   * - ``metadata.code_root_path``
     - no
     - Bazel target pattern for the module's source root.
       Defaults to ``//score/...``.
   * - ``metadata.langs``
     - no
     - Languages present in the module: ``"cpp"``, ``"rust"``, or both.
       Defaults to ``["cpp", "rust"]``.
   * - ``metadata.extra_test_config``
     - no
     - Additional flag values passed to test runs.
   * - ``metadata.exclude_test_targets``
     - no
     - Bazel target patterns excluded from CI test runs
       (e.g. known-failing or platform-specific tests).
   * - ``metadata.rust_coverage_config``
     - no
     - Rust coverage profile name. Defaults to ``"ferrocene-coverage"``.
       Set to ``null`` to disable Rust coverage for this module.

Step 2 -- Regenerate the ``.MODULE.bazel`` file
------------------------------------------------

After editing ``known_good.json``, run the generation script:

.. code-block:: bash

   python3 scripts/known_good/update_module_from_known_good.py --override-type git

This regenerates ``bazel_common/score_modules_target_sw.MODULE.bazel``
with the correct ``bazel_dep`` and ``git_override`` blocks for every module
listed in ``known_good.json``. For scrample the result looks like:

.. code-block:: python

   bazel_dep(name = "score_scrample")
   git_override(
       module_name = "score_scrample",
       commit = "32abf22969081a7c4a97733cf6d1b88b9e0c9d55",
       remote = "https://github.com/eclipse-score/scrample.git",
   )

Alternatively, use the VS Code task:

* **Terminal -> Run Task... -> "Switch Bazel modules to git_overrides"**

.. note::

   For local cross-module development, use ``--override-type local_path``
   so Bazel picks up a local checkout instead of downloading from Git.
   See the repository README for the full workspace setup procedure.

Step 3 -- Add a standalone showcase (optional)
-----------------------------------------------

If the module provides runnable example binaries, expose them to the
S-CORE CLI by adding files under ``showcases/standalone/``.

**``showcases/standalone/scrample.score.json``** -- describes the examples
shown in the interactive CLI menu. Scrample ships both a C++ and a Rust binary,
so both are listed as separate entries:

.. code-block:: json

   [
       {
           "name": "Scrample C++ Hello World",
           "description": "Hello World logging example using score::mw::log in C++",
           "apps": [
               {
                   "path": "/showcases/bin/scrample_cpp",
                   "args": [],
                   "env": {}
               }
           ]
       },
       {
           "name": "Scrample Rust Hello World",
           "description": "Hello World logging example using score_log in Rust",
           "apps": [
               {
                   "path": "/showcases/bin/scrample_rust",
                   "args": [],
                   "env": {}
               }
           ]
       }
   ]

**``showcases/standalone/BUILD``** -- add a ``score_pkg_bundle`` entry that
bundles both binaries and the JSON config file:

.. code-block:: python

   score_pkg_bundle(
       name = "scrample",
       bins = [
           "@score_scrample//src_cpp:scrample_cpp",
           "@score_scrample//src_rust:scrample_rust",
       ],
       config_data = ["//showcases/standalone:scrample.score.json"],
       package_dir = "standalone",
   )

**``showcases/BUILD``** -- reference the new ``_pkg_files`` target in the
top-level ``showcases`` bundle so it ends up in every image:

.. code-block:: python

   score_pkg_bundle(
       name = "showcases",
       bins = ["//showcases/cli"],
       other_package_files = [
           "//showcases/standalone:comm_pkg_files",
           "//showcases/standalone:kyron_pkg_files",
           "//showcases/standalone:scrample_pkg_files",   # added
           "//showcases/orchestration_persistency:orch_per_pkg_files",
           "//showcases/simple_lifecycle:simple_lifecycle_pkg_files",
       ],
       package_dir = "showcases",
   )

The CLI auto-detects all ``*.score.json`` files at runtime, so no further
registration is needed.

Step 4 -- Verify the integration
----------------------------------

Run a Bazel build for the new module to confirm the integration is working:

.. code-block:: bash

   bazel build @score_scrample//src_cpp:scrample_cpp @score_scrample//src_rust:scrample_rust

Optional -- Add Bazel patches
------------------------------

If the module's upstream ``BUILD`` files need adjustments (e.g. to expose
internal targets for integration testing), add patch files under
``patches/<module_name>/`` and reference them in the ``bazel_patches`` list
in ``known_good.json``.

Patches must be in unified diff format and are applied with ``patch -p1``:

.. code-block:: bash

   git diff HEAD > patches/scrample/001-fix-visibility.patch

Add a ``BUILD`` file in ``patches/scrample/`` that exports the patch files:

.. code-block:: python

   # patches/scrample/BUILD
   exports_files(glob(["*.patch"]))

Then reference them in ``known_good.json``:

.. code-block:: json

   "score_scrample": {
       "repo": "https://github.com/eclipse-score/scrample.git",
       "hash": "32abf22969081a7c4a97733cf6d1b88b9e0c9d55",
       "bazel_patches": [
           "//patches/scrample:001-fix-visibility.patch"
       ],
       "metadata": {
           "code_root_path": "//src_rust/...",
           "langs": ["cpp", "rust"]
       }
   }

Testing the integration end-to-end with ``score_starter``
----------------------------------------------------------

Once the module is integrated and the showcase configured, the full
end-to-end test is done via the interactive launcher ``score_starter``
included in the repository root.

1. **Start the launcher** from the repository root:

   .. code-block:: bash

      ./score_starter

   A text menu appears listing all available image targets:

   .. code-block:: text

      Use up/down arrows to navigate, Enter to run, q to quit

        Run QNX x86_64 QEMU
      > Run Linux x86_64 Docker
        Run Elektrobit corbos Linux for Safety Applications aarch64 QEMU
        Run Autosd x86_64 QEMU
        Exit

2. **Select the target image** with the arrow keys and press ``Enter``.
   For a quick local check, choose **"Run Linux x86_64 Docker"**.
   Bazel will build the full image (first run may take several minutes)
   and launch a Docker container with the S-CORE CLI.

   .. note::

      The Linux image requires Docker to be running on the host.
      For QNX or AutoSD, additional toolchain licenses and QEMU
      networking setup are required -- see the respective README files
      under ``images/`` and ``runners/``.

3. **The S-CORE CLI starts automatically** inside the container.
   It scans all ``*.score.json`` files and presents a multi-select menu
   of all available examples. Both scrample entries appear automatically:

   .. code-block:: text

      Select examples to run:
        [ ] Communication Sender Receiver Example
        [ ] Kyron basic example
        [ ] Kyron select example
        [ ] Kyron safety task example
        [ ] Scrample C++ Hello World      <- scrample entries
        [ ] Scrample Rust Hello World     <- scrample entries
        [ ] ...

4. **Select the example** with ``Space``, confirm with ``Enter``.
   The CLI launches the selected binary and streams its output to the terminal.
   For scrample the expected output is:

   .. code-block:: text

      2026/05/22 12:00:00.0000000 00000000 000 ECU1 SCRM scra log info verbose 1 Hello from SCRAMPLE!
