# File based rule checks

## Test Function
The functionality of the Sphinx build rules can be verified with test rst files.

The function *test_check_rules* in *test_rules_file_based.py* is executed for
each rst file in the directory *rst*.
It creates a SphinxTestApp and a document source folder with an index.rst file
that contains a toctree with the given rst file.

It uses the SphinxTestApp to build the documentation and checks for the
**expected/not expected** warnings.

## Create a test rst file
To add a new test case create a new rst file in the rst directory.
The test files can also be organized in a subfolder structure below directory rst.
The test files are expected to contain the following format:

    #CHECK: <check functions>

    #EXPECT: <warning message>
    #EXPECT-NOT: <warning message>

    <need information>

**\<check functions>**<br>
Check functions (comma separated) to be used for the Sphinx build. Following
                    warnings will only be generated by these check functions.
                    Only one CHECK statement per file. Usually at the very top.
                    If CHECK is not provided, all checks are enabled.

**\<warning message>**<br>
Message text which is expected/not expected during the
                    Sphinx build to be shown.
                    This message is checked for the Sphinx-Needs directive
                    specified after the EXPECT/EXPECT-NOT statement.

**\<need information>**<br>
One or more Sphinx-Needs directives needed for the
                    Sphinx document build

**Example:**

    #CHECK: check_options
    #EXPECT: std_wp__test__abcd: is missing required option: `status`.

    .. std_wp:: Test requirement
        :id: std_wp__test__abcd

This example verifies that the warning message
*std_wp__test__abcd: is missing required option: \`status\`*
is shown during the Sphinx build. Only the *check_options* check is enabled.
